JUDY WOODRUFF, PBS ANCHOR,
NEWSHOUR: Hello.
And I'm joined again tonight by
Audie Cornish
of NPR's All Things Considered.
Welcome, Audie.
AUDIE CORNISH, NPR HOST, ALL
THINGS CONSIDERED:
Thanks, Judy.
WOODRUFF: Our lead story, the
Federal Appeals
Court, based in San Francisco,
has refused
to reinstate President Trump'’s
immigration
order.
A three-judge panel issued the
unanimous ruling
late today.
President Trump called it a
political decision
and he tweeted to say, "See you
in court.
The security of our nation is at
stake."
Joining me to explain the
decision is NEWSHOUR
regular Marcia Coyle of "The
National Law
Journal."
So, Marcia, you'’ve had a little
bit of time
to look at this ruling, which
just came down
about 45 minutes ago.
What do you find?
MARCIA COYLE, CHIEF WASHINGTON
CORRESPONDENT,
"THE NATIONAL LAW JOURNAL":
Well, first of
all, this was what we call a per
curiam opinion,
which means it was an unsigned
opinion and
it was a unanimous opinion by
the three appellate
judges.
The government had to show the
panel here
that it had the likelihood of
success on the
merits and also there was a
likelihood of
irreparable harm if this panel
did not put
aside the temporary restraining
order that
was blocking the president's
executive order.
The panel said basically that
the government
did not provide evidence to
support either
claim - that it would succeed on
the merits
and that there was irreparable
harm.
In terms of the likelihood of
irreparable
harm, the government had said
that the seven
countries, for example, that are
targeted
in the order were countries that
had been
designated by prior
administrations and Congress
as being having terrorist
activity.
But the panel said that there
was no evidence
of strikes here in the country
by those and
also that the temporary
restraining order
just restores the status quo
that existed
for years before President Trump
issued his
order.
Then on the merits, the panel
was concerned
about two things, in particular.
One, it felt that the claims
that the people
who were denied entry to the
country had been
also denied due process of law;
and by that
we mean, they were not given
notice or a hearing
to determine whether they could
enter the
country.
And the panel was particularly
concerned about
legal permanent residents.
Even though the White House
counsel had said
the order didn't cover that, the
panel said
that wasn't binding and they had
to go on
the basis of the order itself.
And the panel also found that
there were serious
claims of religious
discrimination.
Even though those claims are
very early in
terms of judging the merits, the
panel felt
that there was enough there for
now that the
temporary restraining order
should stay in
effect and allow the next step
to go forward,
which would've been a full
hearing by the
federal judge in Seattle.
And finally, the court looked at
the public
interest here.
And it said there were aspects
of the public
interest that favored both
sides.
One side, the government,
national security;
on the other side, freedom from
discrimination,
freedom to do the free flow of
travel, freedom
from separation of families.
And so, that was the basis
basically for the
court to hold that the
government loses.
CORNISH: But, Marcia, again, the
three judges
essentially disagreed with the
government's
arguments on its main points.
COYLE: It did.
In fact, one particularly
crucial point, the
government had argued that this
executive
order was un-reviewable by a
federal court.
And the panel said, on that
point, that that
argument runs contrary to the
fundamental
structure of our constitutional
democracy.
The role of the judiciary, the
panel said,
is to interpret the law and
sometimes that
requires resolving litigation
that challenges
the constitutional authority of
one of the
three branches.
And the panel said, it's our
duty to do what
we'’re doing basically.
WOODRUFF: As we reported just a
moment ago,
the president has said, '‘see you
in court,'’
it's clear the government is
going to appeal
this.
What happens next?
COYLE: Well, the Department of
Justice said
tonight that it was reviewing
its options.
It can seek full review before
the Ninth Circuit,
all of the judges on the Ninth
Circuit, or
it may also go perhaps to the US
Supreme Court
with an emergency request to set
aside the
temporary restraining order.
Judy, I also should point out
there were many
people who followed the hearing
on Tuesday.
The panel's decision is on the
Ninth Circuit's
website.
You just have to Google Ninth
Circuit and
you'll be able to find it.
CORNISH: That is very helpful.
All right, we'’ll wait to see
what the administration
does.
Marcia Coyle, thank you.
COYLE: My pleasure.
WOODRUFF: So, tonight's appeals
court decision
came after President Trump'’s
criticism of
the court even as he pushes his
nominee for
the US Supreme Court.
John Yang has that story from
the White House.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
DONALD J. TRUMP, PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES:
A new era of justice begins and
it begins
right now.
JOHN YANG, GENERAL ASSIGNMENT
CORRESPONDENT,
PBS NEWSHOUR: The man who ran as
the law and
order candidate made clear today
he'’s now
the law and order president as
Jeff Sessions
was sworn in as President
Trump'’s attorney
general.
TRUMP: We face the menace of
rising crime
and the threat of deadly terror;
and it's
not getting better, but it will
get better.
YANG: For days, Mr Trump has
been attacking
the federal judges considering
challenges
to his temporary ban on travel
from seven
mainly Muslim countries.
His Supreme Court nominee, Neil
Gorsuch, told
Connecticut Democratic Senator
Richard Blumenthal
that a tweet referring to one of
the jurists
as a so-called judge was
disheartening and
demoralizing.
Even though a spokesman for
Gorsuch confirmed
the comments, today, the
president insisted
otherwise.
TRUMP: His comments were
misrepresented.
And what you should do is ask
Sen. Blumenthal
about his Vietnam record that
didn'’t exist
after years of saying it did.
So, he misrepresented that, just
like he misrepresented
Judge Gorsuch.
YANG: Blumenthal, who was in the
Marine Corps
reserves during the Vietnam War,
but never
served overseas, apologized in
2010 for saying
during his Senate campaign that
he had served
in the war.
The president's comments came in
a bipartisan
meeting that included Democratic
Senators,
he hopes, will vote for Gorsuch.
They included four Democrats up
for reelection
next year in states that Mr.
Trump won, like
Jon Tester of Montana.
SEN.
JON TESTER (D), MONT.: The
president can say
what he wanted about Dick
Blumenthal, but
Dick Blumenthal is a quality guy
and a very,
very good senator.
YANG: Does that sort of thing
impact your
decision at all?
TESTER: No.
Not on this.
Not on this at all.
I think that we'’re going to take
at the
nominee for what he is and what
his past work
and we'’ll move forward from
there.
YANG: Meanwhile, senior Trump
advisor Kellyanne
Conway got into hot water today,
when she
followed up on the president's
criticism of
Nordstrom for dropping Ivanka
Trump'’s fashion
line.
KELLYANNE CONWAY, SENIOR ADVISOR
TO THE PRESIDENT
OF THE UNITED STATES: I own some
of it.
I fully - I'’m going to just give
it - I'’m
going to give a free commercial
here, and
go buy it today everybody.
You can find it online.
YANG: That appeared to run afoul
of ethics
laws against federal employees
endorsing products.
The president is exempt under
that law, but
Conway is not.
White House Press Secretary Sean
Spicer.
SEAN SPICER, WHITE HOUSE PRESS
SECRETARY:
Kellyanne has been counseled and
that's all
we'’re going go to go with.
She's been counseled on that
subject and that's
it.
YANG: House Oversight Committee
Chairman Jason
Chaffetz said Conway's remarks
were clearly
over the line and unacceptable.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
YANG: Shortly after the court
decision came
down, a group of reporters ran
into the president
in the hallway in the West Wing.
He told them that he thought the
decision
was political, that he was going
to fight
on and that he would eventually
prevail, saying
that the nation'’s security was
at stake.
Judy?
WOODRUFF: So, John, just
quickly, it'’s clear
this has become an enormous
issue for this
White House.
YANG: Absolutely.
I think the fact that this is
one of - a
campaign promise, a signature
promise of the
campaign, one of the first big
executive orders,
challenged in court and you'’ve
seen him
- how important this is, taking
on the judges
personally in tweets and saying
that he's
going to fight this to the end,
fight all
the way to the Supreme Court.
CORNISH: John Yang at the White
House, we
thank you.
In the day'’s other news, the top
US commander
in Afghanistan said thousands
more troops
are needed to help defeat
Taliban insurgents.
Gen. John Nicholson testified
before the Senate
Armed Services Committee, saying
more trainers
and support could help the
Afghan Army break,
what he called, a stalemate.
GEN.
JOHN NICHOLSON, COMMANDER OF
RESOLUTE SUPPORT
MISSION AND U.S. FORCES
AFGHANISTAN: I have
adequate resourcing in my
counterterrorism
mission.
In my train, advise and assist
mission, however,
we have a shortfall of a few
thousand, and
this is in the NATO train,
advise, assist
mission.
So, this can come from the US
and its allies.
CORNISH: The US still has more
than 8,400
troops in Afghanistan in a war
that'’s now
lasted 16 years.
WOODRUFF: A powerful storm
paralyzed cities
across the northeastern US
today, dumping
more than a foot of snow in some
places.
Scores of accidents, tied up
roads across
the region and the heavy snow
and high winds
forced hundreds of schools to
close from New
York to Boston to Maine.
Officials everywhere appeal to
the public.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: When we get
into the evening
or the overnight that if people
continue to
stay out of the way of
sanitation, let them
do their job, then they go on
the offensive
and are not fighting a constant
barrage of
snow coming in, they can get
things pretty
good for tomorrow morning.
(END VIDEOTAPE CLIP)
WOODRUFF: The storm has also
grounded more
than 3,500 airline flights
through tomorrow.
CORNISH: Construction on the
final stretch
of the hotly-contested Dakota
Access Oil Pipeline
is now underway.
That'’s after the US Army Corps
of Engineers
gave the go-ahead for crews to
lay pipe under
the North Dakota reservoir.
As the work resumed, the
Cheyenne River Sioux
Tribe filed a last-ditch legal
challenge to
try to stop its completion.
The tribe says it fears a leak
could pollute
water supplies.
WOODRUFF: The newest member of
the United
States Senate took his seat
today.
The Governor of Alabama
appointed state Attorney
General Luther Strange to the
post.
He was sworn in today by Vice
President Pence.
A special election will be held
in 2018 to
fill the seat permanently.
Strange replaces Jeff Sessions
who officially
became the US Attorney General.
CORNISH: And on Wall Street, a
rally fueled
by strong corporate earnings
reports.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average
gained 118
points to close at 20,172.
The NASDAQ rose 32 points and
the S&P 500
added 13.
Still to come on the NEWSHOUR,
President Trump'’s
continued attacks against
federal judges,
the White House takes heat for
calling a deadly
raid in Yemen a success, and
Arizonans outraged
over an undocumented mother's
deportation.
All that and much more.
WOODRUFF: And now, on a
different court question
and that is the mounting
controversy over
President Trump'’s attacks on the
judiciary.
We'’ve just referred to them.
For that, we turn to two former
judges.
Paul Casale teaches at the
University of Utah
College of Law.
He served as a federal judge for
five years
in Utah's District Court.
And Rebecca Kourlis is a former
justice of
the Colorado Supreme Court.
She now runs the Institute for
the Advancement
of the American Legal System at
the University
of Denver and we welcome both of
you to the
program.
And, of course, I'm talking to
you, Professor
Casale and Justice Kourlis, just
as we've
learned about the - what the
circuit court
in California has ruled, and
that is denying
the administration's appeal.
But let me turn to you first,
Justice Kourlis,
what'’s your reaction to what
President Trump
has been saying in recent days
about this
circuit court in California?
REBECCA KOURLIS, EXECUTIVE
DIRECTOR, ADVANCEMENT
OF THE AMERICAN LEGAL SYSTEM AT
THE UNIVERSITY
OF DENVER: Good evening, Judy,
and thanks
for the opportunity to comment
on this.
My concern is not so much the
disagreement
with the outcome, but rather the
attack on
sort of the legitimacy of the
process.
And that risks further polarity,
further critique
of the judiciary as a political
branch of
government, which it is not,
cannot be, was
never intended to be.
WOODRUFF: So, an attack on the
legal system
is what you're saying and it's -
and you'’re
saying it'’s inappropriate, it's
over the
line, I mean, how would you
characterize it?
KOURLIS: Well, I mean, I don't
want to sort
of join in the epithet tossing
contest that
we seem to be in nationally at
present, but
I am a long time former judge,
justice, I
now study the courts in the
context of IAALS,
the institute at which I work,
and our whole
focus is on trying to protect
the independence
and impartiality of the
judiciary, which is
not to say that I'm an apologist
for judges.
Judges make mistakes.
Judges can approach cases in a
biased way.
There are some judges who are
activists.
But the point is that the
process itself is
what we count on.
And we agree, as a society, that
we will trust
the ultimate outcomes from that
process.
There are appeals, there are
ways to approach
things, but, ultimately, it's
about the balance
of powers and the legitimacy of
the court.
WOODRUFF: Prof. Casale, how do
you see it
what the president has been
saying about the
court?
Very critical remarks.
PAUL CASALE, PROFESSOR,
UNIVERSITY OF UTAH
COLLEGE OF LAW: Well, I think
he'’s been
very critical of the court, but
then again
the court has been striking down
or at least
staying one of the signature
pieces of his
campaign, the immigration
reform, and we have
a long tradition of three
co-equal branches
of government - co-equal
branches of government
that have often felt free to
criticize what
the others are doing.
You can go all the way back to
Abraham Lincoln,
who very famously even refused
to follow some
edicts from the US Supreme
Court.
So, I see the dialogue as, in
some ways, being
healthy, although I would hope
that the discourse
could be elevated at least above
some of the
things that have recently been
said.
WOODRUFF: Justice Kourlis, why
isn't it just
healthy dialogue?
And it does go back.
I mean, we think about what
other presidents
have done and said about the
court.
KOURLIS: So, here'’s sort of the
bottom line
for me, Judy.
It's not OK to criticize a judge
as illegitimate
or activist just because you
disagree with
the outcome.
It's fine to say I think that's
the wrong
ruling, I disagree with the
basis upon which
the ruling is issued, but to
sort of claim
that the judge has no right to
issue that
ruling, that to me crosses the
line.
WOODRUFF: And Prof. Kourlis,
when President
Trump called Judge Robart a
so-called judge
and then he went on to talk
about - I think
he used the word disgraceful -
the way the
judges conducted themselves or
some of the
judges conducted themselves at
the appellate
hearing on Tuesday of this week,
is that not
stepping over the line?
Is that calling into question
the very role
that judges play?
KOURLIS: It is, to me.
WOODRUFF: I'm sorry.
I meant that for Prof. Casale.
KOURLIS: Sorry.
CASALE: Well, I think he's
stepping over a
line of decorum, but I'’m not
sure that he'’s
stepping over some line that
invalidates the
separation of powers.
I mean, President Trump has made
it one of
his signature, I guess, style
points, you
could say, that he's going to be
very plainspoken,
and so it's not surprising to
find he'’s
using strong language to
criticize the judges.
I wouldn't be using that same
language.
I think it's a violation of our
rules of civility.
But one of the things that
President Trump
has indicated is that he'’s going
to press
some of those boundaries and
he's going to
use new forms of communication,
like Twitter,
that probably prevents some of
the nuance
or maybe even some of the
elegance that we've
seen from previous presidents.
WOODRUFF: So, Justice Kourlis,
what about
that?
I mean, it can be argued that
this president
is taking advantage of new
methods of communication,
including Twitter.
KOURLIS: I'’m OK with that
actually and I'm
OK with plain talk and an effort
to pierce
through some of the complexities
of the legal
system because I certainly don't
think it's
OK to hide behind that.
But my point fundamentally is
that judges
have a role.
Their role is to determine the
facts in front
of them at the trial court
level, apply the
law, rule, and then the parties
can appeal
it as far up the process as
possible.
If the whole process is
perceived to be political,
if judges are perceived to rule
on the basis
of who appointed them or what
political party
they have, then impartiality
goes out the
window.
So, people in positions of
power, people in
leadership positions, I hold to
a higher standard
of acknowledging the balance of
powers, the
role of each branch of
government.
And by the way, I would apply
this evenhandedly.
I don'’t think it's OK to call
President
Trump a so-called president.
There is a legitimacy of process
that we all
honor and that's part of
democracy.
WOODRUFF: What about the point
she's making,
Prof. Casale?
CASALE: Well, President Trump I
think has
recognized the legitimacy of the
process.
He'’s appealed to the Ninth
Circuit and I'm
assuming he's going to ask the
Justice Department
to appeal to the Supreme Court
now to have
the decision overturned.
But I think it's unfair to take
certain labels
off the table as inappropriate.
There is a healthy debate in
this country
about whether our judiciary, and
particularly
our federal judiciary, is too
activist - that
is, it is making laws rather
than applying
laws.
And you can have that debate in
the dry language
of law professors or you can
have that debate
in the more robust language of
Twitter feeds
and plainspoken talk.
And I think President Trump is
trying to have
that debate in a way that
average Americans
can understand and communicate
effectively
in that way.
Again, I wouldn't speak in those
ways, but
I think he'’s certainly entitled
to speak
in those ways.
WOODRUFF: Well, I just want to
come back to
you quickly, Prof. Casale, and
read to you
what President Trump said in one
of his remarks.
He said this judge opens up our
country to
potential terrorists.
He said if something happens,
blame him and
the court system.
You think that's within the
bounds of what
a president can say.
CASALE: Yes, absolutely.
I mean, what's at stake in this
immigration
debate is a debate about whether
we are effectively
protecting our country from
terrorism.
And so, to the point to the
consequences of
an adverse ruling is exactly
what the government
lawyers are doing out in the
Ninth Circuit
and I assume will be doing soon
to the Supreme
Court.
WOODRUFF: And we do expect - we
have every
reason to assume the White House
- the administration
will continue to challenge and
to appeal that
decision.
Well, we want to thank both of
you, Prof.
Paul Casale, Justice Rebecca
Kourlis, we appreciate
your joining us.
Thank you.
CASALE: Thank you.
KOURLIS: Thank you, Judy.
CORNISH: There are lingering
questions over
the deadly raid by US Navy SEALs
in Yemen
last month.
While it's still unclear exactly
what happened
on the ground, the question of
whether the
raid should be seen as a success
has become
a political one.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
CORNISH: Eight days ago,
President Trump flew
to Dover Air Force Base in
Delaware to honor
a Navy SEAL killed in Yemen.
The US also lost an Osprey
aircraft in the
January 29 raid on Al Qaeda.
Now, despite these losses, the
White House
called the operation a success.
But critics like Republican Sen.
John McCain
disagreed.
SEN.
JOHN MCCAIN (R), ARIZ.: When you
lose a $75
million airplane and, more
importantly, an
American life is lost and
wounded, I don't
believe that you can call it a
success.
CORNISH: The president fired
back this morning,
tweeting that it only emboldens
the enemy
to discuss the raid with
reporters.
He said of McCain, "he's been
losing so long,
he doesn't know how to win
anymore."
Late today, McCain's daughter
defended her
former prisoner-of-war father on
Twitter,
saying "Trump has never served.
My father can't bend one of his
knees or lift
one of his arms above his head.
I am done with this today.
Done."
White House spokesman Sean
Spicer argued Wednesday
that the SEALs gathered critical
intelligence.
SPICER: It'’s absolutely a
success.
And I think anyone who would
suggest it'’s
not a success does disservice to
the life
of Chief Ryan Owens.
CORNISH: The raid also killed
civilians, including
women and children.
"The New York Times" reported
this week that
Yemen has now withdrawn
permission for such
operations.
Yemen's foreign minister denied
that, but
said they are seeking a
reassessment.
(END VIDEO CLIP)
CORNISH: We break down what we
know of the
raid now with Nancy Youssef,
national security
correspondent at Buzzfeed News.
Welcome to the program.
NANCY YOUSSEF, NATIONAL SECURITY
CORRESPONDENT,
BUZZFEED NEWS: Thanks for having
me.
CORNISH: Now, with the tweets
from the White
House, Congress, this has really
become a
kind of political football.
What are people saying inside
the Pentagon?
YOUSSEF: Well, it'’s frankly made
it hard
for people in the Pentagon to
talk about this,
right, because what they see as
a military
operation has now evolved into a
political
issue.
Inherently, they don't talk
about special
operations raid.
They'’re covert.
Now, you have everything being
put in this
political context, trying to
answer the question
of what is success on a US
military operation.
John McCain has called it a
failure.
Last week, the White House was
saying success
was a delicate term because
civilians and
Chief Owens had been killed in
the raid.
And this week, they said it was
categorically
a success.
So, inside - rather than a
discussion about
success or failure, there's a
real measure
going on about the risks and
rewards of this
raid and was it worth given how
tumultuous
it was that it evolved into a
firefight and
that you now have questions
swirling around
it - was this worth - was the
intelligence
gathered worth all that was -
that'’s come
out of it since?
CORNISH: I think this has also
sparked a greater
conversation about the process
and the thinking
that goes into green lighting a
raid like
this, right, and also comparing
it to the
Obama administration.
Talk a little bit about that.
What we know about what happened
in terms
of that process?
YOUSSEF: So, the Obama
administration was
really risk-averse.
And President Trump during the
campaign really
campaigned on the idea of being
more aggressive
in terms of going after
extremist elements
like Al Qaeda, which was the
target of this
raid, and the Islamic State.
And so, we've heard that the
Obama administration
was aware of the raid and the
planning for
it, which was months before it
actually happened,
but that they had decided
essentially that
this was not a decision for them
to make,
that while it had reached to the
National
Security Council, it hadn'’t
reached the
president.
And because the military wanted
to launch
this raid on the first lunar
moon, which was
on January 29, nine days after
the raid, the
decision was formally made by
President Trump.
I think the question that people
are having
is what does the process tell us
about how
President Trump will make
decisions on these
raids and how much does that
differ from the
Obama administration.
And is this more aggressive
approach, how
is it going to manifest in more
risky raids,
more risky operations than we
have seen in
the past eight years under the
Obama administration,
which really was willing to even
endorse some
risks of terror groups being
allowed to sustain
rather than take the risk of
doing operations
like this, dropping boots on the
ground in
a combat zone, like war-torn
Yemen.
CORNISH: As you mentioned, Yemen
has been
in freefall for many years now.
Are we seeing a renewed focus by
the US on
this country and do we have any
sense about
what that could mean going
forward?
YOUSSEF: Well, remember, in the
early hours
of the Trump administration,
they conducted
drone strikes in Yemen.
And we had started to hear talk
that while
the focus has been on ISIS for
the past few
years, Al Qaeda in the Arab
Peninsula has
been one of the few groups that
has been able
to execute external attacks on
Western allies.
Remember, they were part of the
planning for
the Charlie Hebdo attack in
Paris, France,
and so there has been a feeling
that perhaps
this administration would want
to expand its
counterterrorism operations to
not just focus
on ISIS, but focus on a group,
like Al Qaeda,
that has really been able to
flourish in the
last five years of the Yemeni
Civil War because
there'’s so much ungoverned space
and such
a fertile ground for them to
recruit and train.
CORNISH: Nancy Youssef is
national security
correspondent for Buzzfeed.
Thank you so much for speaking
with us.
YOUSSEF: Thank you.
WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the NEWSHOUR,
companies in a
delicate dance with a
businessman as president.
And the ideology White House
Chief Strategist
Steve Bannon portrayed in his
films.
But, first, how one woman'’s
story has sparked
protests in Arizona.
Guadalupe Garcia de Rayos, a
mother of two,
has lived in the US illegally
for more than
two decades.
She was arrested Wednesday after
her regular
check in with immigration
officials.
Dozens of protesters rallied
overnight in
Phoenix as activists blocked off
entrances
to the Federal Immigration and
Customs Enforcement
building and a van carrying
Garcia de Rayos.
She was deported today.
Earlier I spoke with Daniel
González of "The
Arizona Republic" newspaper.
Daniel González, thank you very
much for
talking with us.
So, Ms. Garcia de Rayos had been
checking
in regularly with immigration
officials, was
not deported, what was different
about this
time?
DANIEL GONZAÁLEZ, IMMIGRATION
REPORTER, THE
ARIZONA REPUBLIC: Well, what her
lawyer and
activists are alleging is that -
what was
different was the executive
order that President
Trump signed on January 25.
This greatly expands the
priorities that ICE
is given for deportations and it
basically
sends a message to ICE that they
want to - that
the Trump administration would
like to see
a much broader scope of
deportations, and
so the feeling is - is that
under the Obama
administration, she was allowed
to check in,
she was allowed to remain in the
United States,
she was allowed to remain with
her family,
but when she went in to check in
yesterday,
she was taken into custody and
then quickly
deported to Mexico.
WOODRUFF: And we know there was
a felony on
her record.
It had to do with a 2008 raid at
her workplace
conducted under then Sheriff Joe
Arpaio.
She was found to have had
inaccurate identification
and there was a felony
conviction, but again
under the previous
administration that was
not considered enough to deport
her.
GONZAÁLEZ: Right.
Basically, what happened was,
she was working
with a fake Social Security
number.
Sheriff Arpaio was conducting
these massive
worksite raids back in 2008.
When his deputies conducted this
raid, they
seized a lot of the I-9 forms.
These are the government
employment records
and that led her to - that led
sheriff deputies
to Ms. Garcia de Rayos.
They went to her house, they
arrested her,
she ended up pleading guilty to
a felony charge
and then she was turned over to
ICE custody.
She spent some time in a
detention facility
and then ICE decided that she
was not considered
a high priority, most likely
because of her
long ties to the United States,
her two US
citizen born children, her two
decades here.
And so, what she was basically
doing was every
year checking with ICE and then
they would
renew this supervised release.
WOODRUFF: And she argued she was
14 years
old when she came to the United
States.
This is now 22 years later.
She's 36.
She has two children.
She has a husband.
What do people believe is going
to happen
to her now?
What is her recourse?
GONZAÁLEZ: Well, she'’s in
Nogales.
She'’s staying in a shelter
there.
Her family is driving down today
to bring
her some clothes.
She really didn't have anything
when she went
down there.
But as far as I know, she really
has no legal
recourse.
She could spend - she could be
permanently
barred from coming back to the
United States.
There are some provisions that
allow you to
apply for hardship waivers, but
usually you
have to remain out of the
country for 10 years.
But it's really unclear whether
she would
even qualify for that.
Once somebody has been removed
from the country,
it's very, very difficult to
ever come back.
WOODRUFF: Daniel González,
reporter for "The
Arizona Republic", and we expect
there to
be a number of other stories
like this one.
Thank you very much.
GONZAÁLEZ: You're welcome.
CORNISH: It has become a routine
question.
What kind of separation is there
between the
president, his family and the
promotion of
their businesses?
Kellyanne Conway's comments
today about Ivanka
Trump fueled a new round of
criticism and
concerns for the companies
involved.
So, how should businesses
navigate these new
waters?
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman,
explores that with his weekly
installment
of Making Sense.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
PAUL SOLMAN, PBS BUSINESS AND
ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT:
The Super Bowl politicized this
year through
ads.
Airbnb branding itself as
immigration friendly.
Coca-Cola, recycling a 2014 ad,
that also
suggests an alternative
definition of American
patriotism.
And in the larger world,
backlash from Uber
customers over President Trump'’s
immigration
ban, #deleteuber that ultimately
forced its
CEO to step down from a White
House advisory
panel.
Nordstrom dropping the first
daughter'’s
clothing line back in January
with Neiman
Marcus following suit, prompting
a tweet from
President Trump yesterday, "My
daughter has
been treated so unfairly by
Nordstrom.
She's a great person, always
pushing me to
do the right thing.
Terrible!"
(END VIDEO CLIP)
SOLMAN: So, are we seeing the
rise of a new
partisan consumerism, echoing
the country'’s
polarized politics?
We invited two Harvard Business
School professors,
Nancy Koehn and Len Schlesinger,
to answer
the question.
NANCY KOEHN, JAMES E. ROBISON
PROFESSOR OF
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION, HARVARD
BUSINESS
SCHOOL: What we're seeing now
is, I think,
the culmination or perhaps the
next logical
step of a long series of events
and trends
among consumers, many of them
previously alienated
from the political process,
where they use
their dollars to vote on social,
economic
and political issues.
LEONARD SCHLESINGER, BAKER
FOUNDATION PROFESSOR,
HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL: And
relative to today's
administration, there are
countless examples
of how that'’s being played out
on a daily
basis.
So, we have the scenario of the
Ivanka merchandising
line, which has now been
essentially removed
from Nordstrom and Neiman
Marcus.
A #boycottnordstrom
#boycottneimanmarcus for
actually tossing our Ivanka out
of the store
and the same on the other side
of the equation.
SOLMAN: So, boycotts - consumer
boycotts
have been used to express
political beliefs
and to try to affect political
outcomes for
-
KOEHN: - for at least 50 or 60
years, right,
and probably going back farther
than that.
What, again, is new, I think,
Paul, is the
reach and the speed, and that's
all running
on the high-octane fuel of
social media.
And I think the other thing
that'’s new and
different is the emotional
energy that social
media allows.
These are all businesses that
have a very
big word-of-mouth component to
them.
They have a big ego or identity
component
to them.
So, the ability of these
boycotts to affect
those aspects of business
success, consumer
loyalty, word-of-mouth, brand
power, that'’s
a big deal.
SCHLESINGER: And the interesting
thing here
is seeing where it really is a
big deal and
where it isn'’t.
So, in the context of Uber, it
is a service
that people hate to love or love
to hate,
OK?
And the CEO announces he's going
to join the
president'’s Business Advisory
Council.
In the midst of everything that
was going
on at Uber and everything that
was going on
in the administration within the
immigrant
community, he had no choice but
to withdraw
from being on the president'’s
Advisory Council.
You wonder what got them
possessed to actually
join in the first place.
SOLMAN: Because he ought to have
anticipated
the uproar that that might
cause.
SCHLESINGER: Given the
populations that he'’s
serving and the populations,
quite honestly,
that the Uber service is having
a huge negative
impact on, it should have been
obvious.
KOEHN: I would ask or would want
business
leaders to have the same kind of
consciousness
about the divisiveness, about
the electorate,
about the different kinds of
issues that were,
if you will, uncovered, again,
in very emotionally
intense ways during the
campaign.
So, it'’s by no means stay away,
it's let'’s
think this through very
carefully as we think
about how to respond, react,
predict.
SOLMAN: But aren't you saying
stay away?
SCHLESINGER: It'’s precisely
those terms
that give me pause, OK, and have
me advising
in more situations than not for
CEOs, after
doing their balance sheet, to
actually lay
low until there's a bit more
certainty as
to how the administration truly
is going to
govern going forward.
SOLMAN: Are we seeing what's
been called identity
politics playing out now across
the board?
KOEHN: Think about how people
that are on
the boycott Trump businesses
side of things
are thinking of themselves - so,
thinking
of themselves, first, as I don't
support the
president; secondly, I want to
make a difference
here in voicing and in doing
something with
my opposition, my resistance.
So, that is, in some ways, an
exercise in
identity.
So, interestingly, when we
talked on the campaign
about identity politics, we
talked about it
often on the side of Trump
supporters.
I am not sure of my identity,
I'm not sure
where I belong in this country,
that people in Washington
understand or are
acting on my behalf.
SOLMAN: Because candidate Trump
embodied their
sense of identity, sort of
counter to the
mainstream.
KOEHN: Absolutely.
I wonder if we'’re not going to
see a kind
of consumer activism, identity
politics, potentially
a cohesion of the resistance or
the opposition
to Mr. Trump that actually has
to do with
an emerging patriotism.
A huge amount of the resistance,
when you
dig down deep in, is about the
integrity of
Trump'’s actions with relation to
the constitution
or fundamental American values.
SOLMAN: That might've manifest
itself in terms
of consumption.
SCHLESINGER: Well, at the first
level, as
you see it play out just this
weekend at the
Super Bowl, OK?
So, I'm fascinated by listening
to all of
the responses to the Lady Gaga
halftime show.
But the reality is she started
singing God
Bless America and she had a
whole portrayal
of, what I will call, incredibly
patriotic
songs by someone who would not
be naturally
assumed to be among the great
patriots.
And the reality is it's exactly,
I think,
what you're talking about,
Nancy.
For example, the Anheuser-Busch
commercial
celebrating the arrival of
August Busch, the
Airbnb commercial celebrating
the diversity
in the American population
without ever talking
about what Airbnb is or what
Airbnb does.
SOLMAN: I literally did not know
that that
was an Airbnb commercial.
SCHLESINGER: Yes, yes, yes.
KOEHN: Think about that.
If you think tactically from a
marketing perspective,
it's not - we'’re not talking
about what
Airbnb is, but we'’re talking
about the values
of the Airbnb brand or the
values of Anheuser-Busch
ad.
It'’s a little bit like Nike
Towns where
we make these investments in our
brand that
may or may not translate quickly
into profitability
or feed the bottom line, and yet
they'’re
long-term investments in how we
want our consumers
to understand who we are.
SOLMAN: And your point about the
Airbnb ad
being like Nike, I mean, Nike is
all about
image and identity, and not
function, right?
KOEHN: Just do it.
Right, absolutely.
And it'’s been - viewed from the
long term
- remarkably successful.
SOLMAN: Do you think there will
be a group
of companies now or even a group
of products
or services that actually embody
the oppositional
form?
I don'’t know how to quite put
this, the
oppositional form of American
patriotism.
And if so, what would they be?
SCHLESINGER: Well, I think we
saw some of
it this weekend as we saw some
of the more
subtle messaging that came out
of the commercials,
which was, we'’re about all
Americans, we'’re
about being open to everybody,
we'’re about
being absolutely clear that we
welcome all
to our country and to our
businesses.
SOLMAN: So, last question, do
you guys imagine
that, four years from now, we
will have a
country that's as divided in
terms of what
it shops for as who it votes
for?
SCHLESINGER: If I extrapolated
from the trends
of the last several months, I
would say yes,
but that requires me to actually
predict that
what we'’re experiencing today
continues
and, in fact, gets exaggerated
over the next
four years.
I, as an academic, can say
that'’d be really
interesting; as a human being,
I'’d say that's
scary.
SOLMAN: From the Harvard
Business School in
Boston, this is economics
correspondent Paul
Solman reporting for the PBS
NEWSHOUR.
CORNISH: Now, a different kind
of look at
the views of one of the
president's closest
advisers, Stephen Bannon, how
his past work
in film provides a window into
some of his
ideas.
Jeffrey Brown has our look.
(BEGIN VIDEOTAPE)
JEFFREY BROWN, SENIOR
CORRESPONDENT, PBS NEWSHOUR:
He is chief strategist to
President Trump.
Close at hand as policy is made
and decisions
come from the White House.
The president even recently
appointing him
to a seat on the National
Security Council,
a controversial decision.
Stephen Bannon has quickly
gained so much
of a reputation as an
influential behind-the-scenes
string puller that Saturday
Night Live portrayed
him as the Grim Reaper in a
recent skit.
ALEC BALDWIN, ACTOR: Send in
Steve Bannon.
BROWN: Bannon was well known
previously as
Chairman of Breitbart News, the
right-wing
news organization that Bannon
himself once
called the platform of the
Alt-Right, a fringe
conservative group that mixes
populism, white
nationalism and racism.
But he's also worked extensively
in the film
world as executive producer on
two traditional
dramas, including the "Indian
Runner" - Sean
Penn's directorial debut - and
as producer,
writer and director of political
documentaries,
often released during election
cycles.
Among his film topics, the
global financial
crisis in 2010'’s "Generation
Zero."
Sarah Palin featured in the
"Undefeated" in
2011.
More recently, 2016's "Clinton
Cash" about
alleged corruption in the
Clinton Foundation.
And also, last year,
"Torchbearer" about an
America turning from God and the
concurrent
rise of a violent and radical
Islam.
(END VIDEOTAPE)
BROWN: Reporters at "The
Washington Post"
have been looking at Stephen
Bannon's films
and work and how they may inform
his role
as the president's right-hand
man.
Ann Hornaday is a film critic
for "The Post",
Matea Gold covers politics.
Welcome to both you.
Ann, give us first an overview
of themes,
style, approach that emerge when
you look
at the films.
ANN HORNADAY, FILM CRITIC, "THE
WASHINGTON
POST": Well, Bannon has really
come into his
own as mostly a documentary
maker.
He has made and produced fiction
films in
the past, but it'’s really his
documentaries
that get the most attention.
And often, they have political
themes.
He has a few sort of canards and
villains
that he returns to.
He doesn't like the Clintons
very much.
He doesn't like any political
elites very
much.
He rails against the sort of
permanent political
class.
He sees - the films often depict
the world
in very Manichaean terms,
apocalyptic terms.
BROWN: Manichean, black and
white -
HORNADAY: Black and white, very
urgent, very
dramatic, I would say very
hyperbolic in terms
of this fight between good and
evil.
I've described it once as sort
of clash of
civilizations as cage match.
And lately, that has really
centered around
this, what he calls, the
Judeo-Christian West
and what he sees as radical
Islamic jihadism.
BROWN: Matea Gold, he has
referred to the
work as weaponizing film.
He said we'’ve tried to weaponize
film and
we'’ve tried to do it in a
certain way to
get this film to people who
might not necessarily
see a political documentary.
So, he'’s very up front in this
work as at
Breitbart.
MATEA GOLD, NATIONAL POLITICAL
REPORTER, THE
WASHINGTON POST: Right.
One thing that I think is very
important to
understand about Bannon is that
he'’s a very
canny practitioner of whatever
medium that
he'’s engaged with.
He has spoken admiringly about
the techniques
of both Leni Riefenstahl, the
Nazi propagandist,
and Michael Moore, the liberal
filmmaker.
And what we've seen over the
course of his
films is that he explored a lot
of the themes,
the nationalist and populist
themes, that
really then echoed in Donald
Trump's campaign.
He did a documentary about
illegal immigration.
He went through a whole film
that examined
the fall out of the financial
crisis.
We saw him elevating figures
such as Sarah
Palin in his films.
So, we really saw him wrestling
with some
of these same issues that later
came to bear
in his politics.
BROWN: Let's take a look at a
short clip from
the Torchbearer, which is from
last year.
This is featuring Phil
Robertson, who is best
known for the Duck Dynasty
series, and the
theme of defending Christianity
and the rise
of violent Islam.
Here'’s a short clip.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
UNIDENTIFIED MALE: In the
absence of God,
the man with the biggest stick
determines
your worth.
Caesar demands his pinch of
incense.
Violence, decadence, political
anarchy, moral
decay.
Welcome to the City of Man.
"When he opened the fourth seal,
I heard the
voice of the fourth living
creature saying,
come and see these events, more
to come.
And I looked and behold a pale
horse, and
the name of him who sat on it
was death, and
Hades followed with him."
(END VIDEO CLIP)
BROWN: Now, Ann, there'’s a lot
more graphic
imagery that we weren'’t able to
show.
And a lot of it is fast-paced
and louder.
What do you see?
HORNADAY: He definitely has
perfected this
rhetoric that'’s very - again,
very hyperbolic,
very stylized.
He'’s an emotional storyteller.
I mean, there are many ways to
make a documentary.
Some documentaries are
explanatory.
And they try to make a case in
terms of rationality
and data and evidence-based
learning.
But he'’s very much a guy who
goes for the
jugular.
It'’s very emotional, very
emotionalistic.
And, as Matea said, you can
really see the
echoes of that rhetoric style,
that rhetorical
style, not only in Trump'’s
rhetoric, but
just even the behavior in the
first couple
of weeks in terms of the way
that they have
approached, you know, say the
immigration
policy that they unfurled really
without a
whole lot of process involved in
terms of
making sure you get buy-in from
agencies and
legislators, because I think,
you know, that
kind of hews to the same sort of
principle
of make a big splash and appeal
to that emotional
core.
BROWN: Matea, you got a look at
an outline
for a proposed film that never
got made, right,
but written by Stephen Bannon.
And it was to be called
Destroying the Great
Satan: The Rise of Islamic
Fascism in America.
Tell us about that.
GOLD: This was an outline of a
film that he
worked on in 2007 that explored
a lot of aspects
of not only the potential of
radical Muslims
to inflict attacks here in the
United States,
but the potential for Muslim
organizations,
community groups to be serving
as front groups.
And it also would have explored
the sort of
appeasement, as he put it, of
enablers such
as the media, the universities,
the American
Jewish community, that the
outline argued
were actually facilitating the
rise of some
of these radical elements.
And this treatment gives us sort
of a window
into how concerned and
preoccupied, I think,
Bannon has been with the
potential of fundamental
Islam here threatening the
United States.
BROWN: It uses phases like
fundamental clash
of civilization, right?
GOLD: Exactly.
There'’s a sense - and you've
heard him
speak about this.
He actually gave a talk to a
group at the
Vatican in 2014 in which he
outlined a lot
of these worries, the sense that
he has that
the West and Islam are on the
path of a major
clash and war, something that'’s
going to
be very destructive.
He warns in very dire,
apocalyptic terms,
as Ann put it, the potential for
radical Islamic
jihadis to really gain ground in
Europe and
also United States.
And that'’s something that you
see, a thread
through all of his work.
BROWN: Stephen Bannon himself
didn'’t talk
to you for your article, right?
But you did talk to other people
around it
or who have worked with him.
What do they say to explain or
defend or what
he'’s after?
GOLD: People who know him and
have worked
with him say that he does not
harbor bias
and animus toward Muslims as a
whole.
But it seems that really this
perception of
what Islam is has been overtaken
in his mind
by the radical elements that he
really sees
as the vast majority of people
who practice
Islam.
And so, I think it'’s sort of
hard to separate
where his personal views are and
his political
views are, but there is no
question, when
he talks about Islam, he talks
about it as
sort of a threatening set of
beliefs, as opposed
to a religion.
BROWN: Ann, you brought up
Michael Moore earlier,
right, as someone that Stephen
Bannon admires,
in a sense, as a filmmaker.
There'’s a long tradition of
agitprop-type
documentary making.
HORNADAY: Absolutely.
And they'’re both polemicists.
I mean, I think Michael Moore
also appeals
to emotion, in a very different
way.
For one thing, he uses himself.
BROWN: On the completely other
side.
HORNADAY: Exactly.
And he'’s really kind of
perfected his on-screen
persona, this everyman persona.
And that'’s a rhetorical
strategy, in and
of itself.
But Bannon has very much stayed
behind the
scenes.
And, sometimes, he directs these
films.
Sometimes, he doesn'’t.
He often will write them.
But even just - even when he'’s
only producing
them, they really do share, I
think, this
kind of common grammar.
And, as Matea said, what'’s
interesting,
especially in "Torchbearer," is
that nowhere
does he kind of acknowledge that
Islam and
Judaism and Christianity,
they'’re all Abrahamic
religions.
The God presumably is the same
God that they'’re
all worshiping.
But that'’s nowhere - he really
doesn'’t
see Islam as a religion.
It'’s more of an ideology.
BROWN: Matea Gold and Ann
Hornaday, thank
you both very much.
GOLD: Thank you.
HORNADAY: Thank you.
CORNISH: And, for the record,
we'’ve asked
the White House for an interview
with Mr.
Bannon about this and other
subjects.
They have declined our requests
for now.
WOODRUFF: Finally, to our
NewsHour Share,
something that caught our eye
that we thought
might be of interest to you too.
The Oregon zoo has gotten an
unusual amount
of snow this winter and has a
video that1'’s
gone viral of its residents
frolicking in
the powder to prove it.
We reached out to one of the
zoo'’s head
keepers to learn more about how
they and their
animal counterparts deal with
winter weather.
(BEGIN VIDEO CLIP)
AMY CUNNINGHAM, ANIMAL CURATOR,
OREGON ZOO:
My name is Amy Cunningham, an
animal curator
here at the Oregon Zoo in
Portland.
I've been here about 15 years
and I think
we've had maybe three or four
snow events
that have actually caused us to
close the
zoo.
This year's been really
exceptional.
Not only did we get a lot of
snow, but it
stayed around for days and days.
So, if we'’re ever close to the
public, our
essential staff, the people who
feed the animals,
our veterinarians, our grounds
crew, they
make it in regardless of what
the weather
is doing.
They'’ve been known to walk
across the city
to make sure someone'’s here to
take care
of the animals.
There are definitely a lot of
animals here
at the zoo for whom snow would
be normal in
their environment.
All of our native Northwest
animals, the polar
bears, the river otters that
we've got, cougars
and black bears, they all really
enjoy it.
It's a positive reaction for the
most part
when they see the snow coming
down.
And a lot of them will go out
and explore
and have a great time.
There are certainly animals here
at the zoo
for whom snow would not be part
of their natural
environment - all of the animals
from Africa,
for example, or elephants, or
Asian elephants.
Just like your cat or your dog,
the first
time they see snow, there's
investigation,
surprise.
Sometimes, they like it and will
romp around
for a while and then realize
they'’re getting
awfully cold and wet and be
ready to come
inside.
So, they'’ll have access to the
indoors,
even if they can be outside in
the cold.
Even our Amur tiger and leopard
that are from
the Siberian region, they have
heated rocks
and sheltered places where they
can go.
For us, I think it's an exciting
opportunity
for the animals to - regardless
of where
they're from to be - to
experience something
new and different.
If you think about it, getting
to encounter
different kinds of substrate
types, water,
snow, ice, soil, straw,
different kinds of
bedding is yet another way we
make sure that
our animals have a pretty
comprehensive experience
of the world.
I think one of the reasons
people get so excited
about videos of animals in the
snow is it
really - is reminiscent, it sort
of recaptures
that childhood joy and
excitement you have
when it's going to be a snow day
tomorrow.
I also think polar bears, unlike
children
at age 7, as I could attest for
my child,
they can be in the snow for
hours and hours
without ever feeling it.
There's no whining about cold
fingers.
There's no complaining about
where is the
hot chocolate.
They're just - the sheer joy of
getting
to interact with that
environment, without
any negative consequences, is a
really fun
thing for people to watch.
CORNISH: Once again, the top
story of the
day, the federal appeals court
based in San
Francisco has refused to
reinstate President
Trump'’s immigration order.
A three-judge panel issued the
unanimous ruling
late today.
President Trump called it a
political decision
and he tweeted to say, "See you
in court.
The security of our nation is at
stake."
And that'’s the NEWSHOUR for
tonight.
I'’m Audie Cornish.
WOODRUFF: And it's been great to
have you
with us this week.
Thank you.
CORNISH: Thank you so much.
WOODRUFF: And I'’m Judy Woodruff.
So, join us online and again
right here tomorrow
evening with Mark Shields and
David Brooks.
For all of us at the PBS
NEWSHOUR, thank you
and we will see you then.
For all of us at the PBS
NEWSHOUR, thank you
and we will see you then.